Newton Jones Burkett, III (born May 6, 1962), known as N.J. Burkett, is a correspondent for WABC-TV in New York City, the largest ABC television station in the United States. He joined the Eyewitness News team in July 1989 from WFSB-TV in Hartford, Connecticut, where he had been a correspondent since 1986. ==Early life and education== Burkett grew up in Elizabeth, New Jersey, though he describes the choice to use the initials "N.J." as arising from the efforts of his agent and a station president to make him seem less "aristocratic" and not a tribute to his home state.Mason-Draffen, Carrie via Newsday. "What's in a name? At work, an initial reaction", Pittsburgh Post- Gazette, February 11, 2008. Accessed January 23, 2015. "Newton Jones Burkett III, a correspondent for New York's WABC-TV news station, became N.J. Burkett in a sort of Hollywood moment almost 19 years ago.... Mr. Burkett, who did grow up in Elizabeth, N.J., said he looked at the person dumbfounded and said, 'That's right – my mother named her son New Jersey.'" He graduated from Elizabeth High School with the class of 1980 and attended Columbia University.Harris, Doug. "Dateline: The World; Elizabeth Native, NJ (Newton Jones) Burkett of WABC News, writes the 'first draft of history'", Trinitas Hospital Healthy Edge, Fall 2008. Accessed January 23, 2015. "[Q] As a native of Elizabeth, what keeps the City close to your heart? [A] ...I was in the Elizabeth High School graduating class of 1980. I lived in Elizabeth for the first 18 years of my life until I left to go to Columbia University, but my parents still live there." He holds a BA in political science and a master's in international affairs, both from Columbia University. ==Career== Burkett is best known for his coverage of the World Trade Center attacks of September 11, 2001. He was located across from the plaza about a block away and was reporting when his camera operator recorded the first moments of the collapse of the South Tower. Upon realizing the building was collapsing, Burkett shouted to flee the scene and began running. Burkett and his camera operator recorded the aftermath of the collapse as dust and debris covered the area and documented as injured persons were treated by first responders. Burkett's camera operator also filmed the collapse of the North Tower 17 minutes later, after which they found shelter in an underground parking garage to avoid the toxic dust. For this reportage on 9/11, Burkett shared or was awarded outright many prestigious honors, including the George Foster Peabody Award, the Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University Award, the Edward R. Murrow Award, and the Emmy Award for Outstanding On-Camera Achievement from the New York Chapter of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences. In June 2016, Burkett was elected First Vice Chairman of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences by the Academy's Board of Trustees, and served in that capacity until June 2018. He served on the Academy's Executive Committee from 2014 to 2018 and for two terms as President of the Academy's flagship chapter in New York from 2011 to 2015. In May 2019, he was elected New York Chapter President for a third time by the chapter's Board of Governors. In September 2019, Burkett was elected to the Board of Trustees of Newark Public Radio, the operator of WBGO-FM a not-for-profit jazz radio station in Newark, N.J. ==References== ==External links== * Category:1962 births Category:American reporters and correspondents Category:Elizabeth High School (New Jersey) alumni Category:People from Elizabeth, New Jersey Category:People from Orange, New Jersey Category:Living people Category:School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia University alumni Category:Survivors of the September 11 attacks