Nadendla Bhaskara Rao (born 23 June 1936) is an Indian politician who served as the Chief minister of Andhra Pradesh for a brief period in 1984. He served the shortest term yet, as the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh – 31 days. His son Nadendla Manohar is a former MLA from Tenali and a former Speaker in the Andhra Pradesh assembly. ==Start== A lawyer by profession, he graduated from Osmania University, Hyderabad, he entered the AP state assembly in 1978. He served as a Minister of state in Chenna Reddy's cabinet. After TDP won assembly elections in 1983, Bhaskara Rao joined NTR cabinet as Finance minister. ==Short-lived CM== After one and a half years of the TDP's rule he along with his supporters pulled a coup on the NTR government in August 1984. Congress (I) gave support to Bhaskara Rao's group within TDP at a time when NTR was away in the US to undergo angiogram. Since Congress was in power at the (UTC)center and their nominee occupied the AP Governor's post, Bhaskara Rao became CM of Andhra Pradesh. Seventeen opposition parties, including the CPI, CPI(M), BJP and the Janata criticised this move and launched a 'Save democracy movement', leading to massive anti-Centre protest against the dismissal of the TDP government. NTR returned from US, wore black clothes and launched a statewide yathra to protest the dismissal of his government. He called it a dharma yuddham (a war for justice), a war against the authoritarian and autocratic rule at the centre, for restoration of democracy and safeguarding the Constitution. The central government, recalled the governor and reinstalled NTR as CM – the only instance in political history of India when a dismissed CM was reinstated. Bhaskara Rao left TDP and joined Congress (I) along with his close supporter Amukurajah Rao. His reign as AP CM lasted 31 days. ==Post CM days== After a political hiatus, Bhaskara Rao was elected to the 12th Lok Sabha in 1998 from Khammam Constituency. He filed a defamation litigation on N.T.R: Mahanayakudu movie for showing his character negatively.Nadendla Bhaskar Rao comments on NTR MahanayakuduStill regretting floating Telugu Desam: Nadendla He remains active in state politics until 6 July 2019 when he joined Bharatiya Janata Party in the presence of Union Home Minister and BJP President Amit Shah.Former Andhra Pradesh CM Nadendla Bhaskar Rao joins BJPFormer Andhra pradesh CM Bhaskara Rao joins BJP ==References== ==External links== * Biography from 12th Lok Sabha * "Democratic Process and Electoral Politics in Andhra Pradesh" by K.C. Suri (2002) * * History of TDP by G. Vasu Category:1936 births Category:Living people Category:Members of the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly Category:Bharatiya Janata Party politicians from Andhra Pradesh Category:Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh Category:Telugu politicians Category:India MPs 1998–1999 Category:Telugu Desam Party politicians Category:Lok Sabha members from Andhra Pradesh Category:People from Guntur Category:Osmania University alumni Category:Indian National Congress politicians from Andhra Pradesh Category:Chief ministers from Telugu Desam Party Category:People from Khammam district