{{Infobox writer | name = Nien Cheng | image = | birth_date = | birth_place = Beijing, China | death_date = | death_place = Washington, D.C., U.S. | citizenship = American | notableworks = Life and Death in Shanghai | module = }} Nien Cheng or Zheng Nian (January 28, 1915 - November 2, 2009) is the pen name of Yao Nien-Yuan (). She was a Chinese author who recounted her experiences during the Cultural Revolution in her memoir Life and Death in Shanghai."A prisoner of the thought police", New York Times, May 31, 1987.Life and Death in Shanghai, Time magazine, February 5, 2007.Review, Los Angeles Times, June 19, 1988. == Biography == Cheng was born into a rich landowning family in Beijing. She studied at Yenching University and later went to London to obtain a master's degree at the London School of Economics. She returned to China after graduation. During her time in London, Cheng also met her husband Kang-chi Cheng and converted to Christianity. Upon their return to China, Kang-chi Cheng joined the Foreign Affairs ministry of the Nationalist government. The couple lived in Australia briefly, setting up an embassy there, and eventually moved to Shanghai. After the Communist Party of China came to power in 1949, Kang-chi Cheng served at Shell's office in Shanghai until his death from cancer in 1957. Nien Cheng then joined the company as an adviser."Nien Cheng, Telegraph.co.uk, 11 Nov 2009 The couple had one daughter named Meiping, but she died under uncertain circumstances when her mother was in prison."Nien Cheng, Memorist, Is Dead at 94". New York Times. November 2009. In 1966, Cheng was targeted by Red Guards and accused of being a British spy, as she was both Western-educated and the widow of the former manager of a foreign firm in Shanghai. Cheng's book documents her account of her subsequent confinement, which lasted for more than six years. According to her book, Cheng managed to endure the tortures and abuses inflicted by the interrogators and never made any false confessions or perjuries. Cheng used Chinese Communist Party founder Chairman Mao Zedong's teachings successfully against her interrogators, frequently turning the tide of the struggle sessions against them. Although the living conditions at the detention house were inhumanly squalid, Cheng still tried to maintain her dignity and keep her appearance decent as much as possible. In 1973, when offered parole on the basis that her attitude had shown improvement, Cheng resisted leaving the detention house without first receiving official acknowledgment from her captors that she had been unjustly detained. Upon her release, Cheng was relocated from her spacious home to two bedrooms on the second floor of a two- story building. Cheng continued her life under constant surveillance, including spying by the family on the first floor. When released from jail, Cheng was told that her daughter Meiping Cheng () had committed suicide. After Cheng conducted a discreet investigation, she found that this scenario was impossible, and she came to believe that Meiping had been murdered by Maoists after she refused to denounce her mother. The alleged killer of Meiping, a rebel worker named Hu Yongnian, was arrested and given a suspended death sentence by Shanghai authorities in 1980, but he was eventually paroled in 1995. Cheng lived in China until 1980. Using funds that her husband had placed in overseas bank accounts, she first emigrated to Canada and later to Washington, D.C., where she wrote the autobiography. Cheng never returned to China. She stated that the main reason she remained in her self-imposed exile was that she could not bear the constant reminder of her dead daughter at the sight of other young Chinese women. Meanwhile, Cheng also suspected that she was still a constant target of surveillance by the Chinese government. In an interview conducted in 1998, Cheng said she would never return to China until the portrait of Chairman Mao was removed from the gate of Tiananmen Square. Cheng was a longtime friend of U.S. Ambassador to China Nelson T. Johnson and his wife Jane Augusta Washington Thornton Beck Johnson. After moving to Washington, D.C., Cheng traveled extensively and was a frequent speaker on the lecture circuit. She was also a close friend of Baroness Van Aerssen (Suzanne Hiltermann-Souloumiac), wife of the Dutch Consul General in Hong Kong. Nien and Suzanne exchanged several letters on Life and Death in Shanghai. Canadian singer Corey Hart recorded an instrumental song based on her memoir in his 1990 album Bang! Cheng died of renal failure in Washington, D.C. on November 2, 2009. ==References== Category:1915 births Category:2009 deaths Category:Shell plc people Category:American writers of Chinese descent Category:Victims of human rights abuses Category:Prisoners and detainees of the People's Republic of China Category:Chinese prisoners and detainees Category:Chinese emigrants to the United States Category:Victims of the Cultural Revolution