Neal Fort (born April 12, 1968) is a former professional American football player. In college, he played for Brigham Young University. He was an offensive lineman in the National Football League (NFL) for the Los Angeles Rams and the Canadian Football League (CFL) for the Baltimore Stallions and Montreal Alouettes for most of his career. He is currently living in The Woodlands, Texas. ==High school career== Fort attended Central Union High School in El Centro, California. Was a 2-year Letterman in football as an offensive Tackle and defensive End. He played for the late Cal Jones and gives much of his credit to Coach Jones for his belief in the type of player and person he became. Fort was a 1984 California Interscholastic Federation first team selection as an offensive lineman and 1985 first team selection as an offensive lineman and defensive line. ==College football career== Fort played left tackle for Brigham Young University under College Football Hall of Fame coach LaVell Edwards. He was instrumental in the success of prolific BYU offense in the late 80's and early 1990s. Fort for was one of the key protectors for College Football Hall of Fame Ty Detmer and his record-breaking career. Detmer went on to win the Heisman Trophy for the 1990 football season. ==Professional football career== Fort was drafted in the sixth round by the NFL Los Angeles Rams in 1991. He made the teams developmental roster for the entire 1991 season. 1992 off-season He was assigned to the Orlando Thunder of NFL Europa in 1991, but did not play. Fort joined the Baltimore Colts in there inaugural season in 1994. In that season with the Baltimore Colts/Stallions, the team went on to play in the 1994 82nd Grey Cup in Vancouver, British Columbia. They lost to a home town BC Lions team 26-23. He went on to win his first Grey Cup in 1995, the 83rd Grey Cup. The Baltimore Stallions went on to defeat the Calgary Stampeders 37-20, led by Doug Flutie. He would win another Grey Cup in 2002 as a member of the Montreal Alouettes (by this time, the Stallions had moved to Montreal to become the current incarnation of the Alouettes). Fort is currently eligible for the Canadian Football Hall of Fame. ==Personal life== Fort is married to Darla Livingston Fort and has three children: Annie, Jackson and Miles. ==References== Category:1968 births Category:Living people Category:American players of Canadian football Category:Baltimore Stallions players Category:BYU Cougars football players Category:Canadian football offensive linemen Category:Montreal Alouettes players Category:People from Warner Robins, Georgia