Nammalvar Lingusamy, (born 14 November 1967), is an Indian film director, screenwriter, and film producer in Tamil cinema based in Chennai. Lingusamy made his directorial debut with Aanandham in 2001 and followed by Run (2002), Sandakozhi (2005), Paiyaa (2010) and Vettai (2012). He and his brother N. Subash Chandrabose have also produced films through his production company, Thirupathi Brothers. ==Career== Lingusamy born on 14 November 1967 and hails from a town Kumbakonam, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu. He worked as the assistant to A. Venkatesh and Vikraman. He made his directorial debut with the Tamil family drama Aanandham, starring Mammootty. About the film, Linguswamy said: "The film actually is based on real life. Born in a large family I was impressed with the incidents my mother narrated to me. They were deeply etched in my memory and I thought I would use them when I got a chance to direct a film. Thus when Mr. Chowdhry gave me an opportunity I narrated the stories and he found them highly appealing". Linguswamy originally wanted to title the project, Thirupathi Brothers, which he later went on to name his production house.Tamil movies : Lingusamy: What's next after Bheema? Aanandham opened to positive reviews in May 2001, with a critic noting that "it is a promising work from the debutant director".Reviews The film won several awards including the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Tamil, Cinema Express Award for Best Film – Tamil,rediff.com, Movies: Meena wins award for best actress and two Tamil Nadu State Film Awards,Tamil Nadu announces film awards for three years – Tamil Movie News while, The Hindu listed the film amongst the best of 2001. His second film was Run with Madhavan. The film, too, was a commercially successful and also received good reviews.http://www.thiraipadam.com/cgi- bin/movie_review.pl?...review. After the success of Run, Linguswamy announced his plans of re-collaborating with Madhavan in Sathyam, a film about student politics.www.ajithkumar.fr.fm Owing to Madhavan's unavailability, the role went to Ajith Kumar, with the film being newly re-titled Ji. Upon release the film received positive reviews especially a critic from Indiaglitz praising the film citing that "Lingusamy should be appreciated for giving a movie with pulsating sequences. He has infused the script with all the right ingredients and keeps the tempo of the narration on an even keel."Ji Tamil Movie Review – cinema preview stills gallery trailer video clips showtimes Critics from The Hindu claimed that the film "could have been better". Similarly the film received a negative review from Rediff.com's critics citing that "Ji is for Ajith fans only!".Ji is for Ajith fans only! The film took a large opening all over Tamil Nadu,'Ji' limping! but later turned out to be a box office failure and sustained a considerable loss for the producer.'Ji' collapses, 'Constantine' rises! His next project was Sandakozhi with Vishal in his second film. The film was a commercial success grossing $3.5 million at the box office.Sandai Kozhi Tamil Movie Review – cinema preview stills gallery trailer video clips showtimes A critic from Sify in his review wrote: "Lingusamy lives up to his reputation as a director who makes racy action packed family entertainers with his new release Sandakozhi." In 2005, Vikram signed his next project Bheemaa, which faced severe delays and only released in January 2008.VIJAYAKANTH BHEEMA Kollywood Ameer Sivakumar Vijayakanth Nadigar Sangam A M Rathnam Dharmapuri Vikram Rama Narayanan tamil movie news hot stills picture image gallery'Bheemaa' gets a reprieve - Tamil Movie News Upon release, the film gained mixed reviews though reviewers praised Vikram's performance with a critic claiming to see the film "only for him". Similarly the review from The Hindu was critical of the excessive violence and mentioned that "as narration gives way after a point, Vikram can only appear helpless". Noted director Gautham Vasudev Menon criticized the film in a leading newspaper.Gautham rips Bheema! In 2008, Lingusamy began filming his sixth project, Paiyaa featuring Karthi and Tamannaah in the lead roles. Upon release the film and its soundtrack by Yuvan Shankar Raja were successful and received generally positive reviews, with most critics calling the film "summer entertainer" and lauding its technical aspects. Sify described the film as a "road movie laced with mass elements and extraordinary songs", adding that it is a "jolly good ride" and naming it "technically [...] Linguswamy's his best". A reviewer from the Times of India, Bhama Devi Ravi, gave the film 3 out of 5 stars, writing that "the story is not earth-shatteringly new, but what pulls you into the movie is the different spin that Lingusamy gives to the familiar story". Lingusamy's next made the action masala film Vettai with Arya and Madhavan in lead roles. Vettai released on the Pongal weekend on 14 January 2012, and received overall mixed to positive reviews as well. Although Lingusamy has worked in Tamil only, his films have been dubbed or been remade in other languages too. Dubbed Telugu versions of Run, Sandakozhi and Paiyaa, titled Run, Pandem Kodi and Awara, respectively, were released in Andhra Pradesh and also became commercially successful.Karthi's Awara to release in AprilDubbed film is a hit! Aanandham was remade in 2005 as Sankranti by Muppalaneni Shiva in Telugu, while Jeeva remade Run in Hindi under the same title in 2004. In 2014, Anjaan was released with cast of Suriya and Samantha. The film turned out to be a disaster. Critics lashed at the lack of content with some labelling it as a 'Kaatu Kuppa'. Part of the reason for the film's box office result was due to the hype generated by the film crew pre release which it subsequently could not satisfy and also became the basis of memes generated on social media. The film was also released in Telugu in the name of Sikandar for the Telugu fans of Suriya and Samantha. He later directed Sandakozhi 2 (2018) and bilingual Telugu, Tamil movie The Warriorr (2022).second part of the blockbuster film Sandakozhi ==Filmography== Year Film Credited as Notes Director Producer Writer 2001 Aanandham Cinema Express Award for Best Film – Tamil Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Film (Third Prize) 2002 Run 2005 Ji 2005 Sandakozhi 2008 Bheemaa 2010 Paiyaa State Award Best Music Director State Award Choreographer Vijay Award Favourite Song Nominated, Vijay Award for Favourite Director 2012 Vettai Cameo appearance 2014 Anjaan 2018 Sandakozhi 2 2022 The Warriorr Shot simultaneously in Telugu; Telugu film debut ==References== ==External links== * N. Lingusamy at Facebook Category:Tamil film producers Category:Tamil film directors Category:People from Theni district Category:Living people Category:Film producers from Tamil Nadu Category:Film directors from Tamil Nadu Category:21st-century Indian film directors Category:Tamil screenwriters Category:Screenwriters from Tamil Nadu Category:1965 births Category:Telugu film directors Category:Telugu screenwriters