Neal Hendrix (born May 12, 1973) is an American professional skateboarder, commentator, and brand manager. ==Skateboarding career== Hendrix grew up in Lewisville, North Carolina, and started skating backyards and parks across the Mid-Atlantic in 1986. While In the Winston-Salem area, Hendrix did a lot to promote skateboarding and was an inspiration to many young skaters coming up behind him. He let young skaters skate the half pipe In the back yard of his parents house. In 1991 he turned pro for New Deal and two years later moved to southern California, where he resides today. Career highlights include five X Games medals and earning titles in 2005 at the Skatepark of Tampa Pro Vert Contest and China's' Shanghai Showdown. Hendrix ranked 2nd in the 2007 World Cup of Skateboarding and Pro Vert World Rankings. He also skated for 11-years on the Vans Warped Tour. Hendrix was a featured skater on Tony Hawk’s Boom Boom Huck jam and in recent years he's done various demos with Hawk and his crew around the world. Hendrix still competes. In 2016 he won Vert Attack X in Sweden and placed 3rd at the GoPro Beach Bowl in Australia. In 1996, Hendrix skated in the Olympic Games closing ceremonies in Atlanta, Georgia. In October 2018, Hendrix was suspended from his role on the USA Skateboarding executive committee pending a police investigation into sexual assault allegations. In November 2018, The Orange County district attorney declined to pursue a case against Hendrix after allegations of improper sexual contact with a then-14-year-old skateboarder.Roenigk, Alyssa (November 16, 2018). DA drops case against USA Skateboarding's Neal Hendrix. ESPN.com. ==Other career highlights== Hendrix started out as a visiting pro at Woodward Camp in Pennsylvania back in the 1990s. He remained a visiting pro for many years and is now the Brand Manager for the camps worldwide, which include camps in Pennsylvania, California, China and Colorado. Camp Woodward placed Hendrix on administrative leave while the sexual assault investigation is being conducted. He is a broadcaster and commentator for various skateboard contests and series including Dew Tour, X Games and the upcoming VANS World Championship Series. Hendrix was formerly a reporter for Fuel TV's The Weekly Update. Hendrix is a photographer in his free time, documenting the various cities and countries he has visited through his sport. He has had several photography exhibits in the surrounding Los Angeles area including the Lab, in Costa Mesa and UCLA's Kerckhoff Gallery. ==References== Category:1973 births Category:Living people Category:American skateboarders Category:People from Lewisville, North Carolina Category:X Games athletes Category:Sportspeople from California