N. V. Raghuram is a yoga guru from India. == Biography == After completing Bachelor of Civil Engineering from Regional Engineering College Bhopal now Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, in 1970 Raghuram worked as engineer in various departments until 1998 when he resigned his job to devote more time in the service of yoga and Indian philosophy. In 1978 he took training in Kanyakumari and started his association with Vivekananda Kendra and since 1980, he is associated with Vivekananda Kendra Yoga Anusandhana Samsthan, (Yoga Research Foundation VKYOGAS). Mr. Raghuram is the International coordinator and senior yoga teacher of (VKYOGAS) presently known as sVYASA (Swami Vivekananda Yoga Anusandhana University).Profiles of S-VYASA Faculty He is the Chairman of Yoga Bharati Movement since 2003. Raghuram conducted research projects at Middlesbrough General Hospital in the UK and the Northern Colorado Allergy and Asthma Center, Fort Collins.Yoga Journal article Yoga Under Microscope Research papers have been published in international medical journals on these research projects.Yoga Breathing Techniques (YBTs) in Exercise Induced Asthma: A Pilot Study'Measuring the Effects of Yoga in Rheumatoid Arthritis' by I Haslock, R Monro, R Nagarathna, HR Nagendra and NV Raghuram in British Journal of Rheumatology 1994,August, 33(8): 787-8"Randomized trial of yoga in women with breast cancer undergoing radiation treatment: Long-term effects". American Society of Clinical Oncology He was a member of the Indian delegation to the Third International Conference of Ministers and Senior Officials responsible for Physical Education and Sport organised by UNESCO in 1999.UN Conference attendance list Raghuram is credited with rescuing student Sarah Lionheart from his former guru in the 1980s. Sarah was held captive by Swami Prabhuddhananda and repeatedly sexually assaulted over a period of several months. Raghuram’s wife, Dr R. Nagarathna, is the Dean of the Division of Yoga and Life Sciences of the Swami Vivekananda Yoga University. == References == == External links == * Yoga Bharati NGO (US) * sVYASA / Swami Vivekananda Yoga University / India Category:1948 births Category:Living people Category:People from Khammam district