N. P. Hafiz Mohamad is an Indian author,Who's Who of Indian Writers, Official Publication of Sahitya Academy, Govt. of India 1999 sociologist, social activist,Boston College, US, Fulbright Seminar September 2002 and political commentator,List of Experts on Islam and Politics The Henry L Stimson Centre, WashingtonThe New Indian Express 9 April 2011 living in Kerala. Born in Calicut (16 July 1956) to celebrated Malayalam writer N. P. Mohammed,Fictional Biography, The Hindu 21 December 2004Arab News, 4 January 2003, he had his early education in Calicut. He was trained early in the social problems of his society under his illustrious grandfather N. P. Abu Sahib, a famous freedom fighter in MalabarArab News, 4 January 2003 and a vociferous prohibition activist. Hafiz Mohamad completed his post-graduation in sociology from Kerala University with 2nd rank and did his MPhil from Bangalore University. His doctoral thesis is on the matrilineal system among the Muslims of Malabar. He headed the Department Sociology at Farook College for three decadesThe official website of Farook College till his retirement in March 2011. He holds a Post Graduate Diploma in Mass Communication and Journalism from Mysore University and a Post Graduate Diploma in Counselling and Guidance from University of Kerala. He has done International Graduation in TCI(Theme Centered Interaction) from The Ruth Cohn Institute for TCI - Switzerland. He was a participant in the Fulbright September 2002 held at the BOISI Center at Boston College in the United States.Boston College, US, Fulbright Seminar September 2002 He is the first recipient of MM Ghani Award for the Best Teacher in Calicut University. He began his career in writing with the publication of Poovum Puzhayum (1988), a collection of short stories.MEABAG website He received an Edasseri Award for this work in the same year.Edassei Memorial Trust Since then he has published a number of worksSahitya Academi, 1999 and received many prestigious awards including Kendra Sahitya Akademi Award for Children's Literature the Kerala Sahitya Academy Award and Kerala Balasahitya Institute Award. He was editor of the Dubai based TAKE:1 magazine in 2016. His works include Poovum Puzhayum, Koottaksharam, Pranayadancharatthil, Cheriya Cheriya Meenukalum Valiya Malsyavum (Stories); Pravaasikalude Pusthakam, Manassinte Arogyam, Samoohathinte Arogyam, Paikkanum Pareeksha Ezhuthanum Padikkaam, Makkalude Padanam, Ramsan: Prasakthiyum Pradhanyavum, Keralatthile Muslim Sthreekalude Varthamana Kalam (Non Fiction); Thallakkurangum Pullippuliyum, Bahumaanyanaya Padusha, Kanakamalayile Nidhivetta, Arabinaatile Nadodikkathakal, Akashatthu Oru Adbudhayathra, Vellinilavinte Katha (Children's literature). Along with his position at Farook College, he was an honorary director of the Suraksha De-Addiction and Counselling CentreBoston College, US, Fulbright Seminar September 2002 where he helped hundreds of alcohol addicts and their families to escape their trauma and lead productive lives. An expert on the problems of Indian expatriates in the Persian Gulf, he has conducted numerous workshops for them,.The Peninsula QatarFocussing on `Gulf syndrome' Maleeha Raghaviah, The Hindu, 9 March 2006Islam and Politics He is also a well known trainer and counsellor.RCI for TCIEppler Baden On 24 July 2018, his first novel Espathinayiram was launched by the prominent Malayalam writer M. T. Vasudevan Nair in a program at K. P. Keshavamenon Hall, Calicut. This novel is about the myths and life in and around the coastal Kozhikode. Currently he is in charge of the recently started Department of Sociology at the University of Calicut. == References == Category:Living people Category:Writers from Kozhikode Category:Malayalam short story writers Category:20th-century Indian short story writers Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:Recipients of the Kerala Sahitya Akademi Award Category:Malayalam- language writers