N-Peace, or ‘Engage for Equality, Access, Community and Empowerment’ is a UNDP flagship initiative founded in 2010 to commemorate a decade of UNSCR 1325 implementation via the Women, Peace and Security (WPS) agenda. Currently unique to the Asia-Pacific region, N-Peace operates in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Nepal with the goal of increasing the role of women in conflict resolution and peace-building. N-Peace is built on the premise that if targeted women, men, and civil society organisations are supported with increased investments in capacity, skills, and resources, they will be able to create institutional and social shifts that prioritise the inclusion and empowerment of women and girls, and ultimately change the discourse on the roles of women in peace-building. Many interventions aimed at facilitating WPS have approached women's inclusion through top-down tactics: influencing policy and lawmakers, empowering women to realize their economic potential, and introducing quotas for women's participation in peace agreements and political institutions. However, these approaches arguably do not always address the underlying structural causes of gender inequality. Furthermore, considering peace a top-level political or military process falls short of addressing the broader, nuanced issues faced by ordinary people affected by conflict in society. The annual N-Peace Awards, therefore, serve to shine a much-needed spotlight on grassroots gender equality advocates and women peacebuilders in the region. N-Peace ultimately serves four primary goals: first, to conduct dialogues among communities, governments and other groups related to WPS; second, to build the capacity of women peace activists working on the ground; third, to expand and strengthen the network of peace-building activists to best implement UNSCR 1325; and finally, to support women's participation in peace and security through sharing their stories. ==List of award winners== Winner Year Achievements Title of Award Country of citizenship Khojasta Sameyee 2018 Afghan journalist, she was awarded for her work in using radio to inform remote communities of women's rights, politics, and peacebuilding. Untold Stories Afghanistan Mahira Miyanji 2018 Social activist and founder of Woman is Nation Welfare Organisation, she was awarded for her commitment to women's empowerment and girls' education in Lyari, Karachi. Untold Stories Pakistan Cynthia Maung 2018 Social activist and medical doctor, founder of the Mae Tao Clinic, she was awarded for her efforts in providing emergency maternal healthcare in conflict areas to refugee women at the Thai-Myanmar border. Untold Stories Myanmar Visaka Dharmadasa 2018 Peace activist and founder of the Association of War Affected Women, she was awarded for encouraging important dialogues between women of different ethnicities in Sri Lanka, advocating for the empowerment and inclusion of women in peacebuilding process. Untold Stories Sri Lanka Logshari Kunwar 2018 Journalist and activist, she was awarded for her work in investigating gender-based violence and human rights violations in Nepal. Untold Stories Nepal Mira Kusumarini 2018 Preventing violent extremism expert and founder of C-Save (the Civil Society Action Against Violent Extremism), she was awarded for her work in rehabilitating and reintegrating ISIS- affiliated children and women deportees back safely into society. Untold Stories Indonesia Samira Gutoc-Tomawis 2018 Social activist and government official, she was awarded for her commitment to advocating the rights of women and marginalised groups in post-conflict Philippines. Untold Stories Philippines Hira Singh Thapa 2018 Social activist and champion of women's rights, he was awarded for his continuous efforts in encouraging men to help end the practice of "chauupadi", child marriage, domestic violence, and menstruation taboos in Nepal. Campaigning for Action Nepal Mary Akrami 2018 Activist, founder of the Afghan Women Skills Development Center and member of Afghanistan High Peace Council, she was awarded for having established peace "shuras" for women seeking conflict resolution. Campaigning for Action Afghanistan Muqadasa Ahmadzai 2018 Peace and women's rights activist, she was awarded for her grassroots community efforts against conflict and supporting survivors of domestic violence. Peace Generation Afghanistan Sayeeda Muradi 2017 Women's rights activist, Sayeeda was recognised for her role in managing inclusive'peace shuras' and supporting conflict resolutions for women's issues at community and district level. Untold Stories Afghanistan Cheery Zahau 2017 Co-founder of the Women's League of Chinland and member of the Chin Progressive Party, she was awarded for her efforts in empowering Chin women refugees with leadership training, education programmes, and health and nursing programmes. Untold Stories Myanmar Srijana Karki 2017 Leading social activist calling for the end of gender-based violence, Srijana was awarded for her role in ensuring that the voices of those belonging to marginalised groups or communities are adequately represented and heard at the government level. Untold Stories Nepal Rahmatan 2017 Humanitarian aid worker, counselor, and campaigner for women's judicial rights in Aceh, Rahmatan was awarded for her work in empowering Acehnese women and providing them with the support to emerge as leaders from the grassroots level. Untold Stories Indonesia Farhat Sajaad 2017 Co-founder of the Shining Light Community Development Organisation, a social welfare organisation that equips communities with innovative education, training, and development programmes, she was awarded for encourages Muslim-Christian dialogue through providing training for both communities in economic empowerment activities. Untold Stories Pakistan Bernadine Anderson 2017 Founder of Bridge2Peace (B2P) and La Petite Fleur School in Sri Lanka, she was recognised for her work in supporting rehabilitation efforts by engaging with young former Tamil Tigers, achieving peace through education. Untold Stories Sri Lanka Hadja Giobay Diocolano 2017 Founder of the Kadtabanga Foundation for Peace and Development Advocates, which helps conflict-affected and conflict-vulnerable communities in central Mindanao become Peace and Development Communities, she was awarded for promoting a culture of peace among communities affected by conflict, especially targeting youth and women. Untold Stories Philippines Suraya Yosufi 2017 Founder of the Afghan Girls Debating Project, a project for high school and university students offering specialised training in critical thinking, rational reasoning, research skills, time management, and teamwork, Suraya was awarded for empowering young girls and providing a platform for Afghan women to speak their minds freely. Peace Generation Afghanistan Sharif Shah Safi 2017 University lecturer and Debate Program Director of the Afghanistan Youths Civic Engagement and Educational Organization, Sharif was recognised for his role in preventing extremism, violence, and inequalities by promoting education and respectful conversations among youths. Peace Generation Afghanistan Gunawan 2017 Co-founder of the Sikola Mombine programme, an independent educational institution for women in central Sulawesi that provides training and leadership skills, he was recognised for his role in empowering women in Poso to take more prominent roles in both village decision-making and the correlating peace-building process. Campaigning for Peace Indonesia Farhat Asif 2017 Founder of the Institute of Peace and Diplomatic Studies, she was awarded for facilitating cooperation between government officials, civil societies, think-tanks, and educational institutions to raise the subject of women's inclusion in peace negotiations in Pakistan. Campaigning for Peace Pakistan Dwi Rubiyanti Kholifah 2016 Campaigner for improved rights of minority groups and marginalized women, she was awarded for her role in spreading peace education throughout Indonesia and work in developing leadership skills for women. Untold Stories Indonesia Basanti Chaudary 2016 Former bonded-laborer and Chair of the Kamaiya Pratha Unmulan Samaj (KAPUS), she was recognised for her role in helping violence- affected women to improve their economic and social circumstances, raising awareness of their rights, and providing them with the tools for empowerment. Untold Stories Nepal Habiba Sarabi 2016 First woman Governor within Afghanistan and Deputy Chair of Afghanistan's High Peace Council, Habiba was awarded for her role in bringing peace to Afghanistan and to enhance and enrich civil and political rights for women and girls following the Taliban rule. Untold Stories Afghanistan Sumika Perera 2016 Social activist and founder of the Women's Resource Centre, Sumika was recognised for her role in empowering and supporting women to embrace their rights and face the subjugation entrenched in the society they live in. Untold Stories Sri Lanka Rizwana Shah 2016 Women's rights advocate, Rizwana was awarded for her role in empowering women to gain financial independence in conservative and patriarchal parts of society and advocating for peace as a source of inclusion. Untold Stories Pakistan Mariam Barandia 2016 Executive Director of Kapamagogopa Inc., an NGO which provides skills training for young Muslims and former women combatants to expand their economic opportunities and exercise their role in building peace, she was awarded for her efforts in dispelling negative perceptions and prejudices between communities in the Philippines. Untold Stories Philippines Mossarat Qadeem 2016 Peace activist and founder of PAIMAN Trust, an NGO raising awareness and educating communities on the effects of violent extremism, TOLANAS, and the Women's Alliance for Security Leadership, Mossarat was recognised for her role in educating women to develop critical negotiation skills to aid wider peace-building. Campaigning for Action Pakistan Rizky Ashar Murdiono 2016 Youth leader and co-founder of the 2030 Youth Force Indonesia initiative, Rizky was awarded for his role in empowering and engaging young people in the implementation of SDGs and the promotion of peace and rights awareness, LGBT rights, and disability acceptance. Peace Generation Indonesia Aliya Harir 2016 Co-founder of Aaghaz- e-Dozi, an Indo-Pak friendship initiative which calls for change and new narratives in India-Pakistan relations and Youth Ambassador of Change for the Global Youth Peace Festival, aliya was recognised for her role in advocating for a world where young people are empowered, regardless of their background, ethnicity, or gender. Peace Generation Pakistan Hasina Neekzad 2015 Political and human rights activist for women and children's rights in Afghanistan, she was awarded for building a culture of peace through the positive engagement of young men and villages elders in the Herat province. Untold Stories Afghanistan Ja Nan Lahtaw 2015 Peace advocate and Executive Director of the Nyein Foundation, Ja Nan was recognised for her work in facilitating political dialogues between the Myanmar government and cease-fired ethnic armed organizations and advocating for their inclusion in Myanmar's political life. Untold Stories Myanmar Sharmila Thapa 2015 Founder of the Samida Women's Development Forum, an NGO empowering and supporting single mothers in Nepal, she was awarded for advocating for legislative changes against gender-based violence and providing a support system to women victims of violence. Untold Stories Nepal Rubina Feroze Bhatti 2015 Executive Director of Taangh Wasaib Organisation, a rights-based organisation tackling violence against women, religious intolerance, and discriminatory laws in Pakistan, Rubina was recognised for her role in fighting against gender-based violence and introduced human rights education programming in over 200 schools. Untold Stories Pakistan Jo Genna Martin Jover 2015 Grassroot activist for discriminated indigenous tribes in the Philippines, she was awarded for her dedication to promoting social and cultural equality of indigenous people, specifically the Moro women, and for encouraging peacebuilding between the government and the Moro communities. Untold Stories Philippines Maryam Durani Maryam 2015 Former Kandahar Provincial Council Member and advocate for women's rights, Maryam was awarded for her many initiatives championing women's inclusion in political and social life in Kandahar, Afghanistan. Peace Generation Afghanistan Rahmat Ullah Rahimi 2015 Founder of Modern Schools for Girls, an educational facility which has provided free education to more 600 girls in six refugee communities, he was recognized for championing women and girls' rights and efforts to end child marriages. Peace Generation Afghanistan Kaushila Chaudhary 2015 Former bonded laborer and human rights activist, Kaushila was awarded for her work in ending discrimination and gender-based violence against ex-Kamaiyas in Nepal. Peace Generation Nepal Rahmatullah Noorzai 2015 Youth leader and founder of an educational institute offering free classes and training to internally displaced people, Rahmatullah was recognized for his work with internally displaced women and children in Afghanistan. Peace Generation Afghanistan Hasina Jalal 2014 Advocate for women's rights, journalist and lecturer in rural Afghanistan, she was awarded for pushing the agenda of women's rights in Afghanistan through capacity building with numerous national NGOs. Afghanistan Syarifah Aliyyah Shihab 2014 Founder of the Sharifah Aliyyah Shibab Foundation, which fosters opportunities for marginalized youth discouraging them from being influenced by fundamentalist and extremist opportunities, she was recognized for contributing to the creation of an anti-terrorism mentality among youth in Indonesia. Untold Stories Indonesia Mi Kun Chan Non 2014 Director and Vice- Chair of the Mon Women's Organisation and women's rights champion, she was awarded for advocating women's participation in the peace processes and political life in Myanmar. Untold Stories Myanmar Bimala Kadayat 2014 Youth mobilizer and community role model for building sustainable peace, she was awarded for her efforts in educating her community on issues of bonded labour, violence against women, discrimination, and child marriage. Untold Stories Nepal Mona Parkash 2014 Vice President of the Future Youth Group Hyderabad, which promotes peace and tolerance in Pakistani society, she was awarded for her efforts in promoting and providing education to marginalised Pakistani children. Untold Stories Pakistan Democracy and Peace Women Network 2014 Yangon-based local civil society organisation that strives to connect with individuals and communities whose rights and freedoms have been marginalised. they are awarded for their committed to contributing to both democracy and peace for an inclusive Myanmar. Thinking Outside the Box Myanmar Rabiah Jamil Beg 2014 Leading television journalist and champion of gender equality, she was awarded for her commitment to cover the social issues that hamper the progress of women in conservative societies, and she has been instrumental in bringing to the debate women's perspective. Breaking Stereotypes Pakistan Hajji Khalil 2014 Former jihadist commander, who then became a prosecutor, district governor, and the head of the Badghis Provincial Peace Council in Afghanistan, Hajji was awarded for his contribution to conflict management, reconciliation, and inclusive peace in Afghanistan. Campaigning for Action Afghanistan Miriam Coronel Ferrer 2014 First woman to have signed a major peace agreement as Chief Negotiator of one of the parties, activist and Political Science Professor, Miriam was awarded for her dedication in bringing more women to the peace table and implementing UNSCR 1325 at the national level in the Philippines. Campaigning for Action Philippines Shah Zaman 2014 Chairman of the Milky Way Foundation, lecturer and human rights activist, Shah was awarded for his dedication to ensuring high quality, free education to over 200 students in Pakistan. The Peace Generation Pakistan Wai Wai Nu 2014 Former political prisoner, Wai Wai Nu is a peacebuilder and human rights advocate. Founder of the Women's Peace Network, a platform that promotes peace and mutual understanding between Myanmar's different ethnicities, she was awarded for her commitment to advocating marginalised women's rights. The Peace Generation Myanmar Magdalena Bidau Soares 2013 Peace activist and former guerilla fighter, she is the founder of Feto Haluk Hadomi Timor, an NGO providing training and support for the widows of ex-combatants. She was awarded for her dedication to the ongoing struggle for peace, unity and women's rights in Timor-Leste. Role Models for Peace Timor Leste Thavachsri Charles Vijayaratnam 2013 Co-founder of the Kilinochchi District Women's Development Federation, an NGO providing psychosocial support and social integration programmes for service users, Thavachsri was awarded for promoting the improvement of the lives of marginalised peoples in rural communities in Sri Lanka. Role Models for Peace Sri Lanka Irene M. Santiago 2013 Pioneering women's rights advocate and peacemaker, she is the co-founder of the Mindanao Commission on Women, an NGO composed of Moro, Christian, and indigenous women leaders. she was awarded for her commitment to advancing the significant role of women in the Women, Peace, and Security agenda. Role Models for Peace Philippines Valentina Sagala 2013 Founder of Yayasan Institut Perempuan, an NGO advocating for laws to promote the protection of women and children, monitoring policy formulation and law enforcement, providing direct services to women and children survivors of violence, Valentina was awarded for her efforts in promoting and shaping laws against gender-based violence. Role Models for Peace Indonesia Shashi Kumary Adhikary 2013 Lawyer and advocate for gender equality, she was awarded for her commitment to campaigning for gender equity within Nepal's laws and women's access to equitable justice, promoting women's rights from education and property rights to the basic right of identity. Role Models for Peace Nepal Masuada Karokhi 2013 Afghan member of Parliament and MP and activist, Masuada was awarded for raising awareness about the promotion and protection of women's rights in Afghanistan. Role Models for Peace Afghanistan Suprayoga Hadi 2013 Civil servant and champion of women's rights, Suprayoga was awarded for his efforts in the inclusion of women in peace and security issues in Indonesia. Men who Advocate for Equality Indonesia Rohaniza Usman 2013 Former Philippine Country Director and Coordinator for the Asia America Initiative, Rohaniza was awarded for promoting peace and development through education, inter-generational engagement and socio-economic development in Mindanao and Bangsamoro. Emerging Peace Champions Philippines Farkhunda Zahra Naderi 2012 Former Afghan Parliamentarian and Senior Advisor to the President on UN Affairs, she was awarded for her commitment to representing women's voice in institutional settings and fighting for their political participation. Role Models for Peace Afghanistan Quhramaana Kakar 2012 Gender Advisor for the Afghanistan Peace and Reconciliation Program, she has been instrumental in developing gender- responsive policies and organising women's groups to function as a pressure group to the government. Quhramaana was awarded for her commitment to engaging women and youth in the most insecure parts of the country towards creating peace and rebuilding Afghanistan Role Models for Peace Afghanistan Suraiya Kamaruzzaman 2012 Founder of Flower Aceh and advocate for the rights of Acehnese women, Suraiya was awarded for work to empower women by ensuring their safety and advising them on issues of economic and reproductive rights. Role Models for Peace Indonesia Rupika De Silva 2012 Founder of Saviya, an NGO focused on supporting the rights of women and children in local communities, she was awarded for promoting a peace based approach of development for southern provinces and other conflict-affected areas of Sri Lanka and empowerment of women's entrepreneurship skills. Role Models for Peace Sri Lanka Radha Paudel 2012 Author and activist, she was awarded for her commitment to advocating for equal citizenship, the stop of child marriage and the empowerment of Mahesh women in Nepal. Role Models for Peace Nepal Teresita Quintos Deles 2012 Social activist, civil servant and former Presidential Advisor to the Peace Process in the Philippines, she was awarded for her efforts in implementing UNSCR 1325 on Women, Peace, and Security at national level in the Philippines. Role Models for Peace Philippines Sister Lourdes (Mana Lou) 2012 Founder of ISMAIK, a solidarity network across Timor-Leste dealing with urgent humanitarian assistance and poverty, she was awarded for her dedication in promoting and defending human rights in Timor-Leste. Role Models for Peace Timor-Leste Sadhu Ram Sapkota 2012 Former Joint Secretary at the Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction of Nepal, he was awarded for his efforts in applying the UN Security Resolutions 1325 and 1820 on recognizing and empowering women's rights and experiences, making Nepal the first country in South Asia to nationalize and operationalize these provisions. Men who advocate for equality Nepal Amina Azimi 2012 Founder of Empowering Women with Disability and Landmine survivors, Amina was awarded for her advocacy for the protection and the promotion of the rights of women and girls with disabilities. Emerging Peace Champions Afghanistan Purna Shova Chitrakar 2011 Founder of the "Ban Landmines Campaign Nepal", she was awarded for her effort in empowering landmines victims and providing them with access to the opportunities they need to fulfil their goals. Role Models for Peace Nepal Filomena Barros Dos Reis 2011 Human rights and justice activist, she was awarded for her commitment to campaigning for political change on behalf of Timorese women. Role Models for Peace Timor-Leste Shreen Abdul Saroor 2011 Founder of both the Mannar Women's Development Federation and the Women's Action Network for the empowerment and promotion of women's rights, she was awarded for her efforts in campaigning for peace and creating stability between the different ethnic groups in Sri Lanka. Role Models for Peace Sri Lanka Electronita Duan 2011 Founder of Politenik Perdamaian Halamahera, an institute for those whose education was interrupted by armed conflict, she was awarded for her commitment to peacebuilding and the pursuit of peace through education and creative means. Role Models for Peace Indonesia Rubina Feroze Bhatti 2011 Founder of Taangh Wasaib, Rubina is devoting her life to creating a more peaceful Pakistan. She protects the rights of religious minorities and women who are targets of gender-based violence. Untold Stories Pakistan Category:Peace awards Category:Awards established in 2010