N.B. (released as Pocketful of Sunshine in North America) is the second studio album released by British singer Natasha Bedingfield. It was released in the United Kingdom on 30 April 2007 through Phonogenic Records. In the United Kingdom it produced two top ten hits, "I Wanna Have Your Babies" and "Soulmate". In January 2008, the album was released in the United States and Canada under the name Pocketful of Sunshine with new packaging and an alternative track listing featuring only six of the original songs. The US version's title song became a top-five hit whilst the lead single, "Love Like This" with Sean Kingston, became a top-fifteen hit. US critics said that the album felt inorganic and awkwardly assembled. ==Music and lyrics== "How Do You Do?", the opening track about flirting, features guitars and a horn section. "I Wanna Have Your Babies", the second track, was chosen as the lead single as it was a representation Bedingfield's shifting priorities from being a single young woman to "dating, searching for a partner" and "looking for Mr Right".Artist Profile . EMI Music Publishing. Retrieved 20 May 2007. The song discusses a woman's battle to stop herself from rushing into relationships in an effort to find the right man to be the father of her children. The song received mixed reviews from music critics, who generally found it to be less impressive than past releases, but its release was moderately successful, reaching the top forty in most countries."I Wanna Have Your Babies" Charts . musicsquare.net. Retrieved 22 April 2007. The second single, "Soulmate", is a ballad on which Bedingfield wonders if there is a partner for everyone. "Who Knows", the fourth track, begins with a "reggae-pop vibe" which slowly progresses to an electro-style sound featuring a string section.Lizzie Ennever. "Soulmate" Album Review. BBC. Retrieved 20 May 2007. It received positive reviews, with one reviewer stating that it was reminiscent of "Amy Winehouse's gruff vocal style and her sassiness".Soulmate Album Review. IndieLondon.co.uk. Retrieved 20 May 2007. "Who Knows" was also featured in the motion picture 27 Dresses. The fifth track and third single is "Say It Again". It is co-written with Mike Elizondo and Maroon 5's lead singer Adam Levine, who also provides backing vocals on the song. "Pirate Bones" discusses the pitfalls of celebrity and fame. On the song Bedingfield commented "if you're giving up your enjoyment of life for somebody else's idea of success, it's like being a pirate who's got his hoard of treasure and is sitting on an island where there are no shops to spend it. It doesn't mean anything." The eighth track, "Angel", was inspired by R&B; music and was composed around a series of piano loops. "When You Know You Know" features an orchestra and its lyrics discuss a failing relationship. The tenth track, "(No More) What Ifs", features a rap by Eve and received negative reviews, with The Guardian describing it as "an ill-advised move for all concerned".Alex Macpherson. "Soulmate Album Review. The Guardian. 27 April 2007. Retrieved 20 May 2007. "Not Givin' Up", features a heavy urban beat with electronic sound effects in the background. The song was well received by critics because of its "near- certain crossover appeal for both sides of the Atlantic". "Still Here", the twelfth track, was originally recorded for the film Rocky Balboa in 2006, but was not included on the soundtrack.Keith Caulfield. Charting As Easily As 'Bruising?'. Billboard.com. 10 November 2006. Retrieved 7 March 2007. The song was later covered by Jennifer Hudson and included on her 2010 second album, I Remember Me. == Critical reception == Professional reviews N.B. BBC (positive) link Digital Spy link The Guardian link Stylus Magazine (B) link Sydney Morning Herald (positive)link Yahoo! link Pocketful of Sunshine Metacritic 65/100 link About.com link AllMusic [ link] Billboard (Positive) link Blender link Entertainment Weekly (B-) link Los Angeles Times link Robert Christgau (C+) link N.B. received mixed to positive reviews from most music critics, but some criticised it for its lightweight content. In a review for The Guardian, Craig McLean wrote that the album has "nothing as catchy as Unwritten, the tunes are on the airy-fairy side of breezy, and the lyrics on the naff side of plain".Craig McLean. "Natasha Bedingfield, Soulmate". The Guardian. 22 April 2007. Retrieved 26 June 2007. The Times called the album "patchy and disappointing" and gave it two out of five stars,The Times (online edition) - review of NB (28 April 2007) whilst Marie Claire magazine said that "many of the tracks are forgettable", but that Bedingfield's "strong voice and eccentricities elevate her above many blonde and bland popstars.""N.B. by Natasha Bedingfield" . Marie Claire. Retrieved 26 June 2007. The album was called "good clean fun, entertaining and inoffensive" by Yahoo!, but was also noted for its lack of risk taking and Bedingfield's decision to continue her "grown-up cartoon pop" rather than try something new and that there was little chance of it being considered a classic album.Dan Gennoe. "Natasha Bedingfield -'Soulmate'". Yahoo!. 4 May 2007. Retrieved 26 June 2007. However, Entertainment.ie reviewer Sheena McGinley was less impressed, and wrote that it was "too embarrassing to listen to in public", rating the album two out of five stars.Sheena McGinley. "Natasha Bedingfield - Soulmate. Entertainment.ie. Retrieved 26 June 2007. Pocketful of Sunshine received generally positive reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 65, which indicates "generally favorable reviews", based on 14 reviews. Kerri Mason, Billboard reviewer, gave the album positive response. Mason wrote,"The album has an undeniable flip-flop feel throughout; like the unplugged soul-chick hoedown Beyoncé tried to conjure at the end of the "Irreplaceable" video."Mason, Kerri. "'Pocketful of Sunshine' Review". Billboard. Retrieved 26 January 2008. Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone wrote that "Bedingfield doesn't have much to say", but commented that "the packaging in which she wraps her openhearted thoughts makes Sunshine a decent little pop record".Hoard, Christian. "Pocketful of Sunshine: Natasha Bedingfield: Review". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 26 January 2008. Bill Lamb of About.com noted that "unfortunately, her second solo album, massively reworked from her corresponding second album in the UK, is simply another professional, corporately polished pop record. Songs and vocals are reasonably solid..." but, he added, "it's hard to hear inspiration."Lamb, Bill. "Pocketful of Sunshine: Natasha Bedingfield: Review" About.com. Retrieved 29 January 2008. Los Angeles Times was disappointed that "I Wanna Have Your Babies" was not included on Pocketful of Sunshine and wrote that "as awkward as the song is, it fleshes out Bedingfield's vision better than Jerkins' Mary J. Blige "Angel" or Rotem's Fergalicious "Piece of Your Heart". The album ending up receiving 2.5 stars out of 4."Album: Natasha Bedingfield's 'Pocketful of Sunshine'". Los Angeles Times. 20 January 2008. Retrieved 26 January 2008. Allmusic gave the album a mixed review and described it as "awkwardly assembled", and added that it "feels inorganic in a way that Unwritten did not, less personal and more vetted by various A&R; executives".Mason, Stewart. [ "Pocketful of Sunshine > Review"]. Allmusic. Retrieved 26 January 2008. Glenn Gambo in a review for Newsday gave the album C+ rating, and wrote that the album "barely registers" and was "full of pale copies of other successful pop [songs] that don't necessarily work for Bedingfield".Gamboa, Glenn. "'Pocketful of Sunshine' Review". Newsday. Retrieved 26 January 2008. ==Commercial performance== N.B. debuted on the UK Albums Chart at number nine on 6 May 2007, selling 19,500 copies in its first week"Sales Decline Hits Albums and Singles". chart- refugees.com (originally from Music Week), 6 May 2007. Retrieved 26 June 2007. This would be the album's highest chart position and the only week it spent within the Top 20. The album spent a total of 13 weeks in the UK Top 100. Outside of the United Kingdom, the album failed to reach the top ten. In Ireland, N.B. debuted at number fourteen and in the Netherlands it reached number thirteen.World Charts. acharts.us. Retrieved 4 August 2007. It peaked outside the top twenty in Switzerland. In Australia, the album failed to enter the top one hundred, but peaked at number eleven on the Hitseekers albums chart.Australian Albums Chart. ARIA Charts. Retrieved 19 June 2007. Pocketful of Sunshine debuted on the Billboard 200 albums chart in the United States at number three, selling 50,000 copies. The first-week sales surpassed her debut album, Unwritten, which sold 34,000 copies its first week of release.Hasty, Katie. "'Juno' Unseats Keys From Atop Album Chart". Billboard.com. 30 January 2008. Retrieved 30 January 2008. The album has become the third highest debut by a United Kingdom-signed female artist in Billboard history, after Joss Stone, who entered at number two and now Leona Lewis, after her debut at number one."Pocketful of Sunshine Goes Down a Storm in the U.S." . NatashaBedingfield.com. 30 January 2008. Retrieved 30 January 2008. The album, however, quickly fell down the chart. After performing on American Idol, sales of the album and single "Pocketful of Sunshine" increased considerably. The album jumped from number 97 to number 24 on the Billboard 200, while the single charted within the top five on the Billboard charts. The album was certified Gold on 12 December 2008. To date it has sold more than 750,000 copies.Caulfield, Keith. "Ask Billboard - UK Imports". Billboard. 12 September 2008. In Canada, the album debuted at number thirteen.Williams, John. "'Juno' soundtrack hits No. 1". Jam!. Retrieved 30 January 2008. ==Singles== "I Wanna Have Your Babies" was released as the lead single from N.B. on 2 April 2007. The single received mixed reviews but reached number seven on the UK Singles Chart and reached the top forty in most countries worldwide. "Soulmate" was released as the second single from the album on 2 July 2007. The single reached number seven on the UK Singles Chart and the top twenty in most countries worldwide, becoming even more successful than the album's lead single. "Love Like This", featuring Sean Kingston, was released on 25 September 2007. It was released for online music stores on 2 October 2007. The single was a top twenty hit in the United States, reaching number eleven on the Billboard Hot 100 and number ten on the Pop 100. The single was released in the United Kingdom on 7 April 2008. "Pocketful of Sunshine" was released on 11 February 2008. The single reached number five on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Bedingfield's second top ten single. It also peaked at number three on the Canadian Hot 100. The song was selected as the theme song of Nickland in Germany. "Angel" was released on 11 August 2008. In its first official week at radio, "Angel" started at number fifty-nine on Mediabase's Top 40 chart with 318 spins and jumped to number forty in its second week. Phil Griffin was booked to direct the music video. It reached number sixty-three on the US Billboard Hot 100, number thirty-five on the US Pop 100, number one on the US Hot Dance Club Play and number forty-one on the Canadian Hot 100. "Soulmate" was released in North America on 9 December 2008. Bedingfield performed the song in a medley at the American Music Awards of 2008 and on Dancing with the Stars. On 25 November 2008 Bedingfield confirmed "Soulmate" to be the fourth single while introducing the song at her Sophie's Lounge performance on Sophie @ 103.7. It only reached number ninety-six on the US Billboard Hot 100, however. ;Promotional singles "Say It Again", was released as promotional single from the album on 7 October 2007. The single completely failed to chart. ==Track listing== === Pocketful of Sunshine === Notes * - signifies a vocal producer. * - signifies a remixer. ==Personnel== ===N.B.=== Adapted from the AllMusic credits.[ Credits]. Allmusic. Retrieved 25 June 2007. *Natasha Bedingfield – lead vocals, vocal producer, vocal arrangement *Adam Levine – backing vocals *Nikola Bedingfield – backing vocals *Danielle Brisebois – backing vocals *Jessica Collins – backing vocals *M. Hauge – producer *Charles Judge – keyboards *Mike Krompass – drum engineering *Adam MacDougall – keyboards *Jonas Myrin – keyboards *Nick Lashley – guitar *Vanessa Freebirn – cello, string arrangements *Ryan Freeland – engineer *Adam Hawkins – engineer, mixing *Wayne Rodrigues – digital editing, drum programming, editing, engineer, keyboards, producer, turntables, vocal arrangement *Brian Scheuble – engineer *Marcella "Ms. Lago" Araica – mixing *Greg Kurstin – instrumentation, mixing, producer *Mark "Spike" Stent – mixing *John Akehurst – photography – mixing *Joanne Morris – art direction – mixing *W. Amar the Wizard Wilkins – drum programming, keyboard programming, keyboards, mixing, producer, programming ===Pocketful of Sunshine=== Adapted from the Pocketful of Sunshine AllMusic credits. *Natasha Bedingfield – background vocals, vocals, audio producer *Louis Biancaniello – audio producer, producer *Danielle Brisebois – backing vocals *Ravaughn Brown – backing vocals *Dernst Emile II – various instruments *Steve Kipner – backing vocals, audio producer, producer *Richard Love – backing vocals *Meleni Smith – backing vocals *Mike Elizondo – audio producer, guitar, bass guitar, bass, programming, keyboards *Andrew Frampton – backing vocals, keyboards, programming *Richard Altenbach – orchestra conductor, arranger, strings *Toby Gad – arranger, audio producer, instrumentation, mixing, producer, programming, various instruments *Mads Hauge – audio producer, guitars, vocal producer *Rodney Jerkins – audio producer, various instruments *J. R. Rotem – instrumentation, arranger *Greg Kurstin – instrumentation, engineering *Jack Rothschild – drums, programming, engineering *John Shanks – guitar, bass guitar, keyboards, backing vocals *Wayne Wilkins – keyboards, backing vocals, drum programming, keyboard programming *Robbie Campesinos – vocal arrangements, backing vocals, guitar arrangements *Trevor Lawrence – drums, cymbals *Charles Judge – keyboards *Nick Lashley, Wendy Melvoin – guitar *Michael Valerio, Kate Bird – bass guitar *Julie Gigante – violin * Neel Hammond – violin *Natalie Leggett – violin *Mark Robertson – violin *Keith Greene – viola *Victor Lawrence – cello * Sebastian Toettcher – cello *Jason Pennock – digital editing *Greg Ogan – engineering, vocal engineering *Lleyton Blaine – assistant engineer, mixing assistant *Adam Hawkins, Brian Scheuble – engineering *Daniel Frampton – vocal engineering *Keith Gretlein – assistant engineer *Anne Kasdorf – assistant engineer *Matt Serrecchio – assistant engineer *Marcella "Ms. Lago" Araica – mixing *Manny Marroquin – mixing *Phil Tan – mixing *Alex Dromgoole – mixing assistant *Josh Houghkirk – mixing assistant *Matt Paul – mixing assistant *David Kutch – mastering *John Akehurst – photography *Michelle Holme – design ==Charts== ===Weekly charts=== Chart (2007–08) Peak position ===Year-end charts=== Chart (2007) Position UK Albums (OCC) 159 Chart (2008) Position US Billboard 200 Pocketful of Sunshine 88 ==Certifications== ==Release history== List of release dates, showing region, edition, format(s), record label(s) and reference(s). Region Date Edition Format(s) Label(s) France 27 April 2007 N.B. Sony BMG Music Germany United Kingdom 30 April 2007 Phonogenic Natasha Bedingfield N.B. Album (88697076452). eil.com. Retrieved 16 March 2007. Japan 9 May 2007 Sony BMG Music Natasha Bedingfield N.B. Album (BVCP-24109). eil.com. Retrieved 16 March 2007. Australia 25 May 2007 Natasha Bedingfield N.B. Album (88697077542). eil.com. Retrieved 11 May 2007. Canada 3 January 2008 N.B. Digital download 22 January 2008 Pocketful of Sunshine United States Epic Japan 23 April 2008 Sony BMG Music Canada 11 November 2008 Pocketful of Sunshine CD+DVD Sony Music United States Epic ==References== Category:2007 albums Category:2008 albums Category:Albums produced by Danja (record producer) Category:Albums produced by Greg Kurstin Category:Albums produced by J. R. Rotem Category:Albums produced by John Shanks Category:Albums produced by Patrick Leonard Category:Albums produced by Rodney Jerkins Category:Albums produced by Ryan Tedder Category:Albums produced by Toby Gad Category:Albums produced by Tom Rothrock Category:Natasha Bedingfield albums fr:Pocketful of Sunshine it:Pocketful of Sunshine pl:Pocketful of Sunshine (album) pt:Pocketful of Sunshine tr:Pocketful of Sunshine