N-buna (nabuna, ナブナ, stylized as n-buna) is a Japanese music producer and composer. He is a Vocaloid music producer and is the guitarist and songwriter for the band Yorushika. == History == N-buna was born in Gifu Prefecture in Japan. His family members all played music instruments, so he bought an electric guitar when he was in 8th grade. He started writing music, but did not publish his works until he came across vocaloid songs and realized that he can post his works on the internet. In 2012, N-buna started composing as vocaloid music producer, and posted on Niconico. After that, his 2013 song reached first on the platform's daily vocaloid ranking. On April 26, 2014, he released his first solo album, . Then, On July 22, 2015, he released with U&R; Records, marking his first album with a major record label. On July 6, 2016, was released. Together with vocaloid producer Orangestar, n-buna wrote the song Star Night Snow for SNOW MIKU 2017. Though n-buna believes that vocaloid has its strengths as the singing is uniquely emotionless, he also wants to compose songs better expressed by a human. Vocalist suis has sung for n-buna's first live in 2016, and n-buna thinks suis's husky voice fits the types of music he wants to make.Thus, in April 2017, n-buna and suis formed the rock band Yorushika. Most of n-buna's activities are henceforth under Yorushika. However, he still uses the name n-buna in various occasions. In 2019, he published a digital single Silence featuring vocalist Sarah Furukawa. NHK invited him to narrate a 2021 documentary on a transgender man living in Sendai, which came as a surprise for n-buna since he was mainly involved in music production. However, he accepted this request. == Discography == Title Details Peak chart position Curtain Call ga Yamu Mae ni () * Released April 26, 2014 * Label: Dwango User Entertainment, Inc. – Hana to Mizuame, Saishuu Densha () *Released July 22, 2015 *Label: U&R; records 24 Walking on the Moon () *Released July 6, 2016 *Label: U&R; records 20 N-buna has also released additional albums under the name of the rock duo Yorushika of which he is a member. == References == Category:Living people Category:Musicians from Gifu Prefecture Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:21st- century Japanese guitarists Category:Vocaloid musicians