The Nevada State League was an Independent level minor league baseball league that played in the 1907 season. The four–team Nevada State League consisted of teams based in Nevada. The Nevada State League played just the 1907 season before permanently folding. Notably, league president John T. Powers was scheduled to umpire a league game in Goldfield, Nevada during the season and took the field with revolvers strapped around his waist, before law enforcement intervened. ==History== A league also called the Nevada State League played as a semi–professional league with teams centered around mining towns in Nevada. The Nevada State League began minor league play in the 1907 season, operating as an Independent league with classification from the National Commission, which oversaw minor league baseball. The 1907 Nevada State League formed as a four–team league with charter franchises in Carson City, Nevada, Goldfield, Nevada, Reno, Nevada and Tonopah, Nevada. The Nevada State League permanently folded after playing only the 1907 season. The official records and statistics of the Nevada State League are unknown. John T. Powers served as league president and Bert Ulmer was the league treasurer. In a meeting held July 6, 1907 at the office of Senator Boyd, the board of directors of the Nevada State League was selected. The directors were Ben Rosenthal of Goldfield, Senator James T. Boyd of Reno, J.P Merder of Carson City and Thomas Kendall of Tonopah. Powers had previously served as president of the Wisconsin State League. Ulmer was an owner of the Elite Saloon in Goldfield. James T. Boyd was a member of the Nevada State Senate from 1906 to 1910. Rosenthal was Goldfield County commissioner. Kendall was a mining pioneer, owner of the Kendall Mine and a founder of Tonopah. During the same meeting, the Nevada State League scheduled games to be played July 13 and 14, 1907, with Goldfield playing at Tonopah and Reno playing at Carson. On August 7, 1907 league president John T. Powers was scheduled to umpire a game in Goldfield, Nevada. Powers took the field with revolvers strapped around his waist. Powers was disarmed by the local sheriff. ==Nevada State League teams== Team name City represented Ballpark Year Carson City "Capitals" Carson City, Nevada Unknown Goldfield "Miners" Goldfield, Nevada Unknown Reno "Mudhens" Reno, Nevada Unknown Tonopah "Mollycoddlers" Tonopah, Nevada Unknown ==1907 Nevada State League overall standings == The official records of teams in the Nevada State League are unknown. Posted research reflects the following known standings and team names. Team standings W L T PCT GB Manager Goldfield "Miners" 9 5 0 .643 – NA Carson City "Capitals" 7 4 1 .636 1.0 NA Tonopah "Mollycoddlers" 3 6 0 .333 3.0 NA Reno "Mudhens" 3 7 1 .300 3.5 NA thumb|Tonopah and Goldfield RR Map and Logo ==References== ==External links== * Baseball Reference Category:Defunct minor baseball leagues in the United States Category:Baseball leagues in Nevada Category:Defunct professional sports leagues in the United States Category:Sports leagues established in 1907 Category:Sports leagues disestablished in 1907 Category:1907 establishments in Nevada Category:1907 disestablishments in Nevada