Nathan Niigan Noodin Adler, sometimes credited as Nathan Adler, is a Canadian writer of horror fiction.Jane van Koeverden, "Nathan Niigan Noodin Adler on writing an Indigenous horror story". CBC Books, April 5, 2017. He is most noted for his 2020 short story collection Ghost Lake, which was the winner in the English fiction category at the 2021 Indigenous Voices Awards.Vicky Qiao, "Nathan Adler, Bevann Fox and jaye simpson among winners for 2021 Indigenous Voices Awards". CBC Books, June 22, 2021. Of Jewish and Anishinaabe descent, he is a member of the Lac des Mille Lacs First Nation.Adina Bresge, "Nathan Adler, jaye simpson among rising writers feted at Indigenous Voice Awards". Victoria Times-Colonist, June 21, 2021. He studied English literature and Native studies at Trent University, integrated media at OCAD University, and creative writing at the University of British Columbia."'The History is Present in Each Moment': Nathan Niigan Noodin Adler on His Spectacular New Short Fiction Collection, Ghost Lake". Open Book, January 6, 2021. He published his debut novel Wrist, a story based on the traditional First Nations mythology of the wendigo, in 2016,Grace O'Connell, "The In Character Interview with Nathan Niigan Noodin Adler". Open Book, August 9, 2016. and he was coeditor with Christine Miskonoodinkwe Smith of the 2019 speculative fiction anthology Bawaajigan: Stories of Power. His short story "Abacus" was included in Joshua Whitehead's Lambda Literary Award-winning anthology Love After the End: An Anthology of Two-Spirit and Indigiqueer Speculative Fiction.Vicky Qiao, "Indigenous anthology Love After The End wins Lambda Literary Award". CBC Books, June 2, 2021. Adler, who identifies as two-spirit, has also done work as a visual artist. ==References== ==External links== * Category:21st-century Canadian novelists Category:21st-century Canadian short story writers Category:21st-century Canadian male writers Category:21st- century First Nations writers Category:Canadian male novelists Category:Canadian male short story writers Category:Canadian horror writers Category:Canadian anthologists Category:First Nations novelists Category:Jewish Canadian writers Category:Canadian LGBT artists Category:Canadian LGBT novelists Category:LGBT Jews Category:LGBT First Nations people Category:Ojibwe people Category:Trent University alumni Category:OCAD University alumni Category:University of British Columbia alumni Category:Living people Category:Two-spirit people Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:21st-century Canadian LGBT people