Nick Begich III is an American politician and entrepreneur from the state of Alaska. He was a candidate for the state’s lone seat in the U.S. House of Representatives during the 2022 U.S. general elections. He is the grandson of the Democrat Nick Begich Sr., who was elected to the House of Representatives in 1970 but disappeared in 1972. ==Biography== ===Early life=== Begich was born in 1978 in Alaska to a prominent political family associated with the Democratic Party.OPINION: Why we’re supporting Nick Begich III for US House; Anchorage Daily News; His father, Nick Begich Jr., was the eldest son of Nick Begich Sr. and his mother Pegge Begich was a political activist. Writer and activist gives science lecture; Frontiersman; Alaska’s at-large congressional district was once held by his grandfather Nick Begich before his disappearance in 1972 on a flight from Anchorage to Juneau. His parents divorced when he was young and he was sent to live in Florida with his maternal grandparents. There, he has stated, he was raised with conservative values. Begich started to be involved with the Republican Party when he was in high school, where he established a chapter of Young Republicans. He later obtained his bachelors in Business Administration from Baylor University and his M.A. from Indiana University. After college, Begich worked in the private sector. He was employed at Ford Motors before his family returned to Alaska in 2004. He then founded a software startup, which he ran for 15 years until he entered politics. Mentored by Young, GOP U.S. House candidates navigate a race shaped by his death; Anchorage Daily News; ===Political Career=== In 2016, Begich ran for a seat on the Anchorage Assembly but lost to Amy Demboski. Nick Begich, Republican son of Alaska’s leading Democratic family, will run for U.S. House; Anchorage Daily News; In 2022, Begich filed his candidacy for the special elections held to fill the late Representative Don Young’s term. Who is Nick Begich, one of the top three candidates running for Alaska's only House seat?; USA Today; Begich was the co-chair for the Alaska Republican Party Finance committee and U.S. Rep. Don Young’s re-election campaign in 2020. While Young has been described as Begich’s mentor, the 44 year-old Begich, expressed his intent to run against Young before his death. He emerged as one of the top candidates during the August 16, 2022 nonpartisan primary alongside the Democratic candidate Mary Peltola and former Republican governor Sarah Palin. He placed third during the special election, full-term primary, and the November 2022 general elections behind Peltola and Palin. He was eliminated in the second round of voting during the general elections after securing a total of 64,392 votes, constituting 24.48% of the total votes cast. Downing: Why I’m voting for Nick III first; Must Read Alaska; Mary Peltola Wins Bid to Serve Full Term in the House for Alaska; New York Times; ===Political positions=== Begich agrees with the Dobbs decision made by the Supreme Court of the United States which allowed abortion bans. Begich says that abortion is not a federal issue and that it should be regulated by the states. Begich opposes gun control legislation. He states that he supports and will defend the Second Amendment. Begich claims that the government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic was not always driven by the underlying science. He also opposes vaccine mandates and other similar government restrictions. Begich does not believe that transgender athletes should participate in sports that correspond with their gender identity. He thinks that transgender athletes should rather participate in sports that correspond with their biological sex. Begich has criticized United States immigration law stating that it takes years to immigrate legally and that it leaves out “valuable would-be citizens.” He also claimed that you could immigrate illegally and receive government handouts. Begich says that Alaska is a model for clean air, clean water, and safe industry resource practices. He says that he thinks that it is paramount for the rest of the world to follow the United States’ lead. Begich has stated that the failure of the United States to ensure basic manufacturing restrictions around the world allows jobs to be easily shipped overseas and has done nothing to address pollution. Begich also stated that technology companies are in a position to control the flow of information to citizens. He says that the abuse of this power should be curbed. ==References== Category:Alaska politicians