The N-260, also known as Eje Pirenaico (Pyrenaean Axis), is the northernmost east–west national road in Spain. In contrast to the majority of Spanish national roads, which were specially constructed during the mid-20th century, the path for this highway was established at 80's decade over several previously existing secondary (or even local) roads. This fact, along with the mountainous characteristics of the eastern Pyrenees regions it crosses, is the consequence of several stretches being uneven and narrow paths with features further from the modern standard national roads. The N-260 is in process of being upgraded to the A-26 autovía. These are the sections of the N-260 road: Section Stretch Notes French border (near Portbou) - Ripoll French border - Figueres French border (near Portbou) - Ripoll Figueres - Olot * This stretch is a part of the former C-260 road between Roses and Olot (the Roses-Figueres section is still named C-260) * The Besalú-Olot stretch has been recently upgraded to the A-26 autovía * The Figueres-Besalú stretch is in process of being upgraded to the A-26 autovía French border (near Portbou) - Ripoll Olot - Ripoll * This stretch is an old, narrow and uneven road which became outdated with the recent upgrading of the nearby C-26 road (Olot- Camprodon-Ripoll section), and specially with the opening of the Collabós tunnel. Ripoll - Puigcerdà path: The ending of the first section at Ripoll and the beginning of the second section at Puigcerdà are connected via the N-152 road, which passes over the Collada de Tosas (1,800m). Ripoll - Puigcerdà path: The ending of the first section at Ripoll and the beginning of the second section at Puigcerdà are connected via the N-152 road, which passes over the Collada de Tosas (1,800m). Ripoll - Puigcerdà path: The ending of the first section at Ripoll and the beginning of the second section at Puigcerdà are connected via the N-152 road, which passes over the Collada de Tosas (1,800m). Puigcerdà - El Pont de Suert Puigcerdà - La Seu d'Urgell * Following the upper Segre river valley Puigcerdà - El Pont de Suert La Seu d'Urgell - Sort * This hilly and narrow stretch passes over Port del Cantó (1,725 m) and is in process of being upgraded Puigcerdà - El Pont de Suert Sort - La Pobla de Segur * Part of the former C-147 road (the other parts of this road were recently renamed to C-13) which follows the Noguera Pallaresa river valley Puigcerdà - El Pont de Suert La Pobla de Segur - El Pont de Suert * passing over Coll de Creu de Perves (1,325 m) At El Pont de Suert: The ending of the second section and the beginning of the third are separated a few km but connected by the N-230 road. At El Pont de Suert: The ending of the second section and the beginning of the third are separated a few km but connected by the N-230 road. At El Pont de Suert: The ending of the second section and the beginning of the third are separated a few km but connected by the N-230 road. El Pont de Suert - Sabiñánigo N-230 - Castejón de Sos * passing over Coll de Espina (1,407 m) and Coll de Fadas (1,470 m) El Pont de Suert - Sabiñánigo Castejón de Sos - Campo * following the Congosto de Ventamillo and the valley of the Esera river El Pont de Suert - Sabiñánigo Campo - Aínsa * passing over the Collado de Foradada (1,020m) El Pont de Suert - Sabiñánigo Aínsa - Fiscal * Recently upgraded stretch El Pont de Suert - Sabiñánigo Fiscal - Broto * Old narrow uneven road which follows the Ara river valley El Pont de Suert - Sabiñánigo Broto - Biescas * Passing over the Puerto de Cotefablo pass (1,425m) El Pont de Suert - Sabiñánigo Biescas - Sabiñánigo * Following the Tena river valley At Sabiñánigo: the road ends at the intersection with N-330 road. At Sabiñánigo: the road ends at the intersection with N-330 road. At Sabiñánigo: the road ends at the intersection with N-330 road. Category:Roads in Catalonia Category:Transport in Aragon Category:National roads in Spain