Nachimuthu Mahalingam (April 9, 1923 – October 2, 2014) was an Indian educationist, industrialist, philanthropist and prominent person in Tamil Nadu. He was the Chairman of the Sakthi Group and Chairman of Ethiraj College for Women between 1972 and 1980. ==Early life and education== Mahalingam was born in Somanthurai Chittoor, Pollachi, in the family of Nachimuthu Palani Gounder and Rukmani. Nachimuthu Gounder was a business man, who founded ABT - "The Anamallais Bus Transport Limited", a passenger transport company on 28.8.1931 at Pollachi, in Tamilnadu. The company had grown with 150 buses in 110 routes around Coimbatore region which laid the foundation for Sakthi group. Mahalingam was married to his cousin, Mariyammal in the year 1945. The couple had 3 sons- Manickam, Balasubramaniam, Srinivaasan and 1 daughter - Karunambal Vanavarayar. He had his school education at Pollachi. He obtained his B.Sc Degree in Physics at Loyola College, Chennai, in 1943. He joined the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai and received his Diploma in Mechanical Engineering in 1945. Became an AMIE in 1951, MIE in 1975 and FIE in 1981 of the Institution of Engineers. == Politics == Since his father Thiru P. Nachimuthu was a municipal chairman, Mahalingam showed interest into politics at very early in life. He was elected as the member of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly in 1952 as an Indian National Congress candidate for the first time at the age of 29. Then he was elected as a member for the same constituency in the consecutive elections 1956 and 1962. During his tenure, he provided Parambikulam-Aliyar project and various schemes for the welfare of Pollachi Constituency. He served as the Board of Directors for several public sector undertakings and the State Planning Commission in two terms. ==Career== Mahalingam joined the Sakthi Group business in 1943 and helped grew the business and counts himself lucky to have started business during the planning era in post-Independence India. After the banks were nationalised by the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, this entrepreneur found it a big boon to start businesses and expand as more and more banks were ready to lend money easily. Today, the Sakthi Group is a name to reckon with as it has forayed into sugar, distilling, automobiles, finance, etc. A well-known philanthropist who donate his wealth towards the development of culture, sports and education. He is the founder of many educational institutions. Some of them are Kumaraguru College of Technology, Nachimuthu Polytechnic College, and Dr. Mahalingam College of Engineering and Technology and involved in the establishment of Institute of Asian Studies in Madras in the year 1981. ==Honours and Titles== Year Award Issued by 2007 Padma Bhushan Government of India 1989-92 Honorary Consul Government of Mauritius 1989 Indira Gandhi National Integration Award All India National Unity Conference, New Delhi 1983 Aram Valarkkum Annal Sri Sankaracharya of Kanchi Kamakodi Peedam 1984 Doctor of Laws Bharathiar University, Coimbatore 1988 Doctor of Science Anna University, Madras 2000 Doctor of Science Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore ==Spiritual life== Mahalingam had an important association with Sri Swami Satchidananda, the Indian swamiji who emigrated to the United States of America and founded the Integral Yoga Institutes. Mahalingham was a devoted follower of the Swamiji and contributed to the moral and financial causes of the Swamiji's works in the USA, especially to the Light Of Truth Universal Shrine (LOTUS) ecumenical temple in Virginia. Mahalingam was also greatly associated with Vethathiri Maharishi and his teachings. He generously donated land for Temple of consciousness - Aliyar. Mahalingam was an ardent follower of Ramalinga Swamigal alias Vallalar. ==Death == He died of a heart attack in 2014 while he speaking at a celebration in Chennai. ==References== ==External links== * Short biography on Om Sakthi Publications Category:1923 births Category:Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in trade and industry Category:2014 deaths